GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: Nearly 200 countries
make history with a breakthrough
climate agreement.
What happens next?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead: An
ever-growing population shows
strength at the polls. We
look at how the GOP is wooing
Latino voters and new shifts in
the race for president.
GWEN IFILL: Plus: A mysterious
infection causes an olive crisis
in Italy.
GIOVANNI MELCARNE, Oliver Grower
(through translator): What is
certain is that these
plants are dying, that these
plants are drying, and we don't
know what the future will be,
and we don't even know that
there's a solution to this
situation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
today insisted coalition forces
are hitting back at Islamic
State militants harder than
ever. As a result, he said, the
group also known as ISIL has
lost key leaders and control of
large swathes of Iraqi and
Syrian territories. The
president
outlined the progress after
meeting at the Pentagon with his
national security advisers.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: Every day, we
destroy as well more of ISIL's
forces, their fighting
positions, bunkers, and staging
areas, their heavy weapons,
bomb-making
factories, compounds
and training camps.
In many places, ISIL has lost
its freedom of maneuver, because
they know, if they mass
their forces, we
will wipe them out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
also called on allies in the
Middle East to step up their
contributions to the fight.
Late today, Saudi Arabia
announced that it is forming a
34-state Islamic military
coalition
to combat terrorism. It includes
Arab countries like Egypt and
Qatar and Islamic countries
like Turkey and Pakistan.
GWEN IFILL: Investigators in
Egypt say October's crash of a
Russian passenger jet can't be
called terrorism yet. That's in
direct conflict with Russian,
American and British statements
that a bomb was probably to
blame. A group linked to the
Islamic State had claimed
responsibility
for the Sinai crash that killed
all 224 people on board. Egypt's
assessment is a preliminary
finding. Their
investigation is ongoing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Argentina, at
least 43 police officers died
today when their bus careened
off a bridge, plunging 65 feet
into a ravine. The crash
occurred near Salta, roughly
1,000
miles north of Buenos Aires.
Rescue crews pulled victims from
the overturned bus, which
was carrying around 60 people.
Investigators believe the
accident was caused by a
ruptured
tire.
GWEN IFILL: Up to 750,000 people
have evacuated the Central
Philippines as a powerful
typhoon
made landfall. The storm slammed
into a tiny village on the
northern tip of Samar Island
today, packing wind gusts up to
115 miles per hour. Authorities
warned the heavy rain
could trigger storm surges,
landslides, and coastal flooding
of up to 13 feet. There were
no -- there was no immediate
word of casualties.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Official results
out today showed France's
Conservative Party held off
a challenge by the far-right
National Front in the second
round of regional elections.
The Conservatives, led by former
President Nicolas Sarkozy,
captured 40 percent of Sunday's
votes. Current President
Francois Hollande's Socialist
Party won nearly 29 percent, and
the National Front
took 27 percent.
Sarkozy warned the far-right's
strong showing in the first
round of votes should have
everyone
on guard.
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE, French
President (through translator):
This mobilization for our
candidates
in the second round should under
no circumstances allow us to
forget the warnings which were
sent to all political leaders,
us included, during the first
round of those regional
elections.
JUDY WOODRUFF: While the
National front garnered its
largest number of votes in any
election,
it still failed to win a single
region in the polls. Last night,
its leader, Marine
Le Pen, downplayed the loss.
MARINE LE PEN, President,
National Front Party (through
translator): The National Front
will
be the main force of opposition
in the regional councils in
France, an opposition which will
be constructive, but demanding,
because we are free of any
associations, an imaginative
opposition, because we are
free of any interest groups.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
anti-immigration National Front
Party had recently seen a rise
in popularity
in the wake of last month's
deadly Paris attacks.
GWEN IFILL: In Saudi Arabia, at
least 20 women won seats on
local councils following the
ultra-conservative kingdom's
first election open to female
candidates and voters; 2,100
seats were up for grabs in
Saturday's vote, but Saudi women
are still banned from driving
or making important decisions
without the approval of a male
relative.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, Army Sergeant Bowe
Bergdahl will face charges of
desertion and endangering his
fellow troops in a
court-martial. Bergdahl walked
off his
post in Eastern Afghanistan in
2009. He was held captive by the
Taliban for five years
before being traded for five of
the group's leaders in
Guantanamo Bay. He now faces the
possibility of life in prison.
GWEN IFILL: A Baltimore jury
today began deliberating the
fate of the first police officer
to stand
trial in the death of Freddie
Gray. Officer William Porter was
in the police van where
Gray sustained his
fatal neck injury.
In closing arguments,
prosecutors argued Porter should
have properly secured Gray in
the vehicle.
But his defense said there is no
evidence Porter's actions caused
Gray's death.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Shrimp peeled by
enslaved migrant workers and
children in Thailand have made
their way to all 50 states. An
Associated Press investigation
found the seafood for
sale at major retailers like
Wal-Mart and Whole Foods, and on
the menu at Red Lobster
and Olive Garden. The laborers
were often held against their
will in unsanitary conditions
and paid little to no wages.
Many of the American businesses
are now condemning the labor
abuse
and vowing to investigate.
GWEN IFILL: Most recreational
drones will soon be required to
register with the Federal
Aviation Administration. The
agency announced that today,
just in time for the holiday
gift-giving
season. Remote-controlled
aircraft weighing between
half-a-pound and 55 pounds can
be
registered on the FAA's Web site
beginning December 21st. That
will help authorities
track down an owner if a drone
collides with another aircraft
or ventures too close to
an airport.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stocks closed
higher on Wall Street today,
boosted in part by strong gains
in the oil industry. The Dow
Jones industrial average gained
103 points to close at 17368.
The Nasdaq rose nearly 19
points, and the S&P 500 added
more than nine.
GWEN IFILL: Still to come on the
"NewsHour": Will the historic
climate accord lead to historic
results?; the GOP tries to win
the Latino vote; a migrant
bottleneck forms in Greece;
and a former college dean's take
on why over-involved parents
could be hurting their kids'
futures.
JUDY WOODRUFF: U.N.
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon
invited world leaders today to
come
to New York this April to put
their signatures on a historic
climate accord.
But there are numerous questions
about its practical realities.
Six years after a summit
in Copenhagen failed to find
common ground, the Paris meeting
ended with a major blueprint
for governments and a
message to business.
Delegates from 195 countries
were on their feet after they
struck a landmark climate
deal in Paris.
LAURENT FABIUS, French Foreign
Minister (through translator):
It's a small hammer, but I think
it will do great things.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JUDY WOODRUFF: French Foreign
Minister Laurent Fabius,
president of the conference,
gaveled
the deal to extensive applause.
For the U.N.'s climate chief, it
was a moment of success after
six years of failure.
CHRISTIANA FIGUERES, Executive
Secretary, United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate
Change: I have been saying for a
long time, we must, we can. And
I used to say, we will.
Today, we can say, we did.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As delegates left
the conference, they cheered the
news and looked for the man
of the hour, Laurent Fabius,
for autographs and pictures.
The agreement lays out a number
of goals and timelines,
including keeping the global
temperature
rise well below 6.3 degrees
Fahrenheit. After 2050, manmade
emissions should be reduced
to a level that forests and
oceans can absorb. Wealthy
countries are encouraged, but
not
required to help poorer ones cut
emissions, to the tune of
pledging at least $100 billion
a year. And nations have to
report on their emissions and
efforts to reduce them.
Hours after the Paris pact,
President Obama chimed in his
praise from Washington.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: The Paris
agreement establishes the
enduring
framework the world needs to
solve the climate crisis. It
creates the mechanism, the
architecture
for us to continually tackle
this problem in an effective
way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even so, critics
of the deal still abound. In
Paris, some protesters said
this agreement doesn't go far
enough, citing no penalties for
countries that don't meet
their targets.
And back in the U.S.,
Republicans in Congress warned
the deal will be shredded in 13
months
if a Republican is elected
president. Utilities and some
Republican politicians are also
challenging
emissions regulations in court.
So, how meaningful are this
weekend's pledges? And does it
signal a fundamental change in
how we will get our energy?
Fred Krupp is the president of
the Environmental Defense Fund.
He's back from Paris. And Robert
Bryce is a senior fellow at the
Manhattan Institute and the
author of several books
about this. His latest is titled
"Smaller, Faster, Lighter,
Denser, Cheaper."
And we welcome you
both to the program.
Fred Krupp, to you first. How
much of a difference is this
agreement going to make?
FRED KRUPP, President,
Environmental Defense Fund: It's
going to make a big difference.
It's really the first COP that
exceeded the expectations that I
had going into it, the
first conference of the parties
that really set us on a path
toward solving this problem.
Now, Judy, it doesn't solve the
climate problem. No one meeting
could do that, not by a long
shot, but it does get us a long
way there. The reductions that
have been pledged by nearly
every country on Earth get us
perhaps halfway there. And then
there is a mechanism built
into the agreement that allows
the ambitions to be ratcheted
up.
And, perhaps most important,
there is transparency, which
means countries will have to be
reporting
their emissions, and there will
be a technical review of those
reports to make sure they're
accurate. And that is critical,
so that there is not only
ambition here, but also
accountability.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Robert Bryce, do
you this as an agreement that
goes a long way toward doing
something about climate change?
ROBERT BRYCE, Senior Fellow,
Manhattan Institute: I do not.
I think there are three key
problems with it, Judy. First
is, none of these targets
that have been set by the
individual countries are legally
binding. Second, Ban Ki-Moon,
the U.N. secretary-general, made
this clear before the meeting
started in Paris when he
said that all of these targets
that have been made by the
individual countries are not
sufficient,
and that they're going to have
to come back in just a few years
and provide new lower
targets for emissions.
And, finally, and perhaps most
importantly, there is nothing in
any of these agreements
that moves the ball forward on
nuclear energy, and this is the
key issue. When you listen
to what the climate scientists
have been saying on this, on
December 3, in The Guardian,
James
Hansen, one of the most
high-profile climate scientists
in the world, along with three
other climate scientists, said
that nuclear energy will make
the difference -- I'm quoting
-- "make the difference between
the world missing crucial
climate targets or achieving
them."
And the hard reality is that,
unless we have an energy form
that can replace substantial
quantities of coal-fired
generation -- and that means
natural gas and nuclear -- then
I think that we're not going to
come near any kind of
significant reductions in CO2
emissions to meet the CO2
emissions targets that have been
laid out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Fred Krupp,
let me take his -- Mr. Bryce's
last point first, that
the agreement doesn't make
meaningful progress on moving
toward nuclear or another real
alternative
to carbon.
FRED KRUPP: Well, I would
strongly disagree with that.
Countries are free to meet their
obligations any way they want
to, but they have to report
and be accountable, as I said
before. China plans to build 30
nuclear power plants and
is constructing about half that
number now. So, if nuclear
technology comes along that's
safe and affordable, nuclear
very much is on the table and
could be part of the agreement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Fred Krupp,
there is no requirement that
countries do that. Is that
correct?
FRED KRUPP: Well, there is no
requirement that countries use
nuclear, no. They're free
to use whatever
technology they choose.
But some countries are pursuing
nuclear, and that's allowed. It
turns out, Judy, that the
cost of solar panels in the last
five years has dropped 80
percent. So, if solar panels
are cheaper than nuclear, why
should the -- an agreement
require countries to use
nuclear?
Nuclear may end up cheaper. That
remains to be seen. Right now,
the plants that are being
built in the United States will
substantially raise the rates of
rate payers in the jurisdictions
where those are being built,
because, right now, it is an
expensive technology, at least
here in the U.S.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Robert Bryce, why
isn't it sufficient, if not --
even the advocates of
this agreement are saying it's
not perfect, but why isn't it
sufficient that countries
are now saying they're going to
move in the direction, not all
necessarily nuclear, but
these other technologies,
alternative fuel technologies?
ROBERT BRYCE: Sure. And we hear
about solar and wind. And we
have heard about solar and
wind.
And, look, I'm pro-solar. I have
solar panels on the roof of my
house. I'm not bullish on
wind, because it takes up too
much land. The problem,
fundamentally, for the
developing
world is that they're not
turning to solar and wind in a
big way. They're turning to
coal-fired capacity.
Let's look at the numbers that
have been published by Sierra
Club and CoalSwarm, two adamant
coal critics. They point out
that, today, there is 276
gigawatts of coal-fired capacity
under construction now. That's
roughly equal to the entire
coal-fired capacity of the
United
States.
Mr. Krupp says we have to make
nuclear safer and cheaper.
There's no question. But to make
that happen, we have to have
strong governmental leadership.
I have written many times about
this. I had a piece in The L.A.
Times just a few days ago. The
United States could be
taking a leadership position in
making nuclear energy safer,
cheaper, developing reactors
that are passively safe.
But we don't have the support --
this is key -- of the main
environmental groups, including
the Environmental Defense Fund.
Sierra Club and Green Peace are
adamantly opposed to nuclear
energy.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: All
right. Excuse me.
ROBERT BRYCE: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm sorry for
interrupting, but let me let Mr.
Krupp respond.
FRED KRUPP: First of all, we're
not opposed to nuclear energy.
Second of all, the statistics
about 276 plants, those were
statistics from a few years ago.
And that was planned, not under
construction. But we had a lot
of plants planned in the
United States just a few short
years ago, and they have almost
all, to a one, been scrapped.
So, India's plans to build
coal-fired plants -- change will
come to India, because it's
in their own national interest.
Sure, they have to lift people
out of poverty. They need
electricity. They need economic
development, but they also need
clean air. Right now, they
have more opportunities than
ever before to create jobs with
renewable energy and to have
clean air. The air pollution is
killing hundreds of thousands of
people a year in India.
So all I would say, Mr. Bryce,
to you is that no one predicted
how fast natural gas came
online in the United States. It
was a big change. And the change
we're seeing now that
I think will surprise a lot of
people is how fast the cost of
these clean energy technologies
are coming down.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
gentlemen, big subject. We are
clearly going to be coming back
to
it a lot in the future.
I want to thank both of you,
Fred Krupp, Robert Bryce. Thank
you.
ROBERT BRYCE: Thank you.
FRED KRUPP: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: It's Politics
Monday, and we have two takes
this week on an increasingly
competitive
presidential race.
As Republicans prepare to debate
tomorrow night in Las Vegas,
religion and immigration
have emerged as running themes.
But are GOP candidates, led by
front-runner Donald Trump,
doing more harm than good when
it comes to expanding the
party's base among a growing
subset of Hispanic voters?
William Brangham traveled to
Washington State recently to
explore one effort, bankrolled
by the billionaire Koch
brothers, to recruit Hispanics
into the GOP's tent.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's election
night, and Avina Gutierrez just
made history. For the
first time ever, voters in
Yakima, Washington, elected a
Hispanic candidate to their city
council, not just one, in fact.
Three Latinos won seats tonight,
this in a city where 40
percent of residents
are Hispanic.
The 35-year-old Democrat says
tonight's victory is just
another sign of the growing
presence
of Latinos in politics.
AVINA GUTIERREZ, Yakima City
Council Member: Tonight means
that I will be able to provide
an example for other Latinas to
see that they do have a seat at
that table.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Her election
is part of a national trend. The
Latino population of
the U.S. has been steadily
rising, while the white
population has been declining.
By 2065, the U.S. is projected
to be a majority-minority
nation, with whites making up
less than half
the population. Politically,
this trajectory has been great
news for Democrats like
Gutierrez.
In national polls, Latinos lean
Democratic more than 2-1 over
Republicans. And, in 2012,
Latinos overwhelmingly picked
President Obama over Mitt
Romney, whose remarks about
Latinos
needing to self-deport
didn't sit well with many.
In its own political autopsy of
that election, the Republican
National Committee openly
acknowledged
that if the party couldn't
figure out a better way to
communicate with Latino voters,
it
would spell electoral doom for
the GOP -- quote -- "It does not
matter what we say about
education,
jobs or the economy. If
Hispanics think we do not want
them here, they will close their
ears to our policies."
And that's where Daniel Garza
comes in. He's the head of The
LIBRE Initiative. It's the
largest conservative Hispanic
political group in the country.
And he's just been given $16
million from the conservative
billionaire Koch brothers to try
and convince Latinos
that conservative ideals and
Latino ideals are one and the
same.
DANIEL GARZA, The LIBRE
Initiative: We are driving a
conversation within the Latino
community
about the virtues of the free
market, whether it's engaging
them on policy issues or on
cultural issues. So, for
example, we believe strongly in
self-reliance, in personal
responsibility,
in that hard work ethic, the
American rugged individualism.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Garza served
in George W. Bush's White House,
and now regularly hosts
forums with today's
GOP candidates.
But his story begins much more
humbly, here, in the
agriculturally-rich Yakima
Valley in
Central Washington. The Hispanic
population has exploded here in
recent decades, as migrant
families like Garza's, who once
just came through to pick apples
and cherries during
the harvest, decided to
stay and put down roots.
Garza showed us the hops fields
-- they're now out of season --
where he and his family
used to work.
DANIEL GARZA: Backbreaking work,
working in the elements. Didn't
pay hardly anything,
and you were powerless. And I
don't know of any mother who
says, I can't wait for my child
to grow up to be a farm worker.
It just doesn't happen. But it's
noble work.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: They lived in
nearby Toppenish, Washington,
population 9,000, in this little
house with no running water.
DANIEL GARZA: The idea, as farm
workers, is that you rent the
cheapest home you can.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It was,
admittedly, a tough life. But
Garza's dad was able to save up
his money and eventually buy
this small motel in town.
It was this step up the economic
ladder where young Daniel began
finding his political beliefs.
He became a cop. He took a job
working for the hard-charging
Republican Congressman Doc
Hastings. He was a huge fan of
William F. Buckley on "Firing
Line." It all made sense
to him, and he became a
card-carrying member of the
Republican Party.
DANIEL GARZA: You know, I sort
of was taken by Ronald Reagan's
approach to governance
and sort of embraced it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Reagan
famously said that Hispanics are
conservatives; they just don't
know it yet.
I mean, do you believe that?
DANIEL GARZA: I do. I do believe
that. And I have always believed
that they embrace the
ideals of the free market.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And that's the
message The LIBRE Initiative is
pushing today, with slickly
produced videos starring Garza
using his rags-to-riches story
as a symbol of conservative
Latino empowerment.
DANIEL GARZA: My father never
took welfare because he didn't
want to depend on anyone
or lose his dignity.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: They're also
spreading their message in more
subtle ways. This is actually
a driver's education class run
by Garza's group. This one's in
Las Vegas, but they do
these in swing states all over
the U.S. The idea is, you draw
Latinos in for useful classes
like these -- they also teach
English-language classes and
help prepare tax returns.
And while they're there, those
voters get a little dose of
conservative politics on
the side.
DANIEL GARZA: I would say, we
use that opportunity as a
platform for ourselves to drive
our ideas,
to talk to folks and connect
with them. And then, you know,
if it resonates with them,
then they join our effort and
they stay connected with us.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Garza's group
collects contact information at
these events for themselves,
which it then shares with a
group called i360, a massive
voter database operation funded
by the Koch brothers' network.
For LIBRE, the hope is that
these events, with their focus
on economic liberty and family
values, will resonate
with Latino voters.
DANIEL GARZA: When you're going
out directly to them and
tailoring your message to them,
then you're earning their trust
and their respect, because
you're connecting with them.
And they matter. And that's what
voters need to feel, that my
life is going to be better
if I vote for that
person or that person.
NINFA GUTIERREZ, Radio Talk Show
Host: I don't think that's going
to -- they're going to
buy that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Ninfa
Gutierrez hosts a popular
call-in radio show on KDNA,
Yakima
valley's Spanish-language public
radio station. She says that,
with the presidential election
nearly a year off, right now,
there's only one thing her
listeners associate with
conservatives
or Republicans.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate: They're bringing
drugs. They're bringing crime.
They're rapists.
NINFA GUTIERREZ: The first call
that we got on one of those
programs said, because that
clown that is saying all these
things about the Spanish people.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Donald
Trump, they're talking about.
NINFA GUTIERREZ: Yes, Donald
Trump, that he doesn't know what
he's talking about. He doesn't
know us, who we are, because
he's saying that we're all,
what, drug dealers, we're
killers,
we're this and that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And the
leading GOP front-runner isn't
showing any signs of backing
down from
his tough stance on
illegal immigration.
DONALD TRUMP: The wall works,
believe me, properly done.
Believe me.
(APPLAUSE)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: While none of
the Republican candidates
support President Obama's
executive
actions allowing undocumented
immigrants to stay in the
country, some argue massive
deportation
isn't feasible. Others argue
that the GOP's harsh words about
immigrants will be a boon
to the Democrats.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: Even having this
conversation sends a powerful
symbol. They're doing high-fives
in the Clinton campaign right
now, when they hear this.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Indeed, super
PACs supporting Democrats are
already out with ads with Latino
voters quoting the
GOP candidates.
MAN: They're rapists.
WOMAN: Criminals.
MAN: Anchor babies.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Garza, who
spoke to an auditorium of
seniors at his old high school,
acknowledges
that the GOP's current stance on
immigration is driving Latinos
away from his party.
And he's been vocal about the
need for them to knock it off
and to embrace comprehensive
immigration reform. But, as he
told these students at a school
that is 86 percent Latino,
he hopes voters focus on more
than just the one issue of
immigration.
DANIEL GARZA: Republicans are
calling that we should now
empower the individual, that
we should focus on growing the
private sector, much more than
growing the government.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Afterwards,
Garza got the rock star
treatment, with students
swarming
around, jockeying for selfies
and autographs. But did his
message resonate?
We sat down with a smaller group
of students from the school to
find out.
If there was a candidate that
stood for all the things you
cared about, whatever those
issues are -- and they were --
it seems like this is my ideal
president, but they didn't
agree with you on immigration
reform, could that person still
get your vote?
STUDENT: No.
STUDENT: I wouldn't vote for
him. My pride is where my family
comes from, so I don't
-- he could be -- I can agree
with him with everything else,
but if he doesn't benefit
my people in the immigration
reform, I would not vote for
him.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Do you see it
as a challenge to your mission,
though, that many leaders
of the GOP come out and say
things that drive the Latino
population into the arms of the
Democrats?
DANIEL GARZA: So, our objective
is to get Latinos behind free
market ideas, the principles
of limited government. That's
our objective. Whatever happens
politically, we can't control
that. We can just help to drive
a conservation within the Latino
community.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Every 30
seconds, another Latino turns 18
in this country. Most of them
are American citizens and
eligible to vote. If these
students are any reflection of
the
broader population, Daniel Garza
has got his work cut out for
him.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham in Toppenish,
Washington.
GWEN IFILL: And now, for more on
where the race stands, including
some surprising new
poll numbers, we turn to our
regular Monday night duo, Tamara
Keith of NPR, and Amy Walter
of The Cook Political Report.
Welcome back.
AMY WALTER, The Cook
Political Report: Thank you.
TAMARA KEITH, National
Public Radio: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk -- get
right to these numbers, very
interesting, over the weekend.
We saw a Des Moines Register
poll, the Iowa Republican poll,
the gold standard. And in
it, we have Cruz at 31 percent,
up 21 percent from the last poll
in October, where he was
only at 10. Trump is at 21
percent, essentially the same
where he was before.
That is a big deal. But right
after that, today, we saw a new
Quinnipiac Iowa poll,
in which it's -- basically, it's
a tied race. Trump is at 28
percent. He's up 3 percent
from 25 percent last time they
went in the field, and Ted Cruz
is at 27 percent, up 4
percent, so they're like neck
and neck, 28-27 percent, well
within anybody's margin of
error.
What's happening? What
is this Cruz surge?
AMY WALTER: Cruz has benefited
from a couple of things. The
first is, the decline of Ben
Carson. That wasn't on the poll
chart, but what you would see is
Ben Carson really plummeting
in the polls.
GWEN IFILL: He went from 28
percent to 13 percent in that
Des Moines poll.
AMY WALTER: Yes, in that Des
Moines Register poll. And you
saw a drop-off too in the
Quinnipiac
poll. So, he has dropped off.
And that has benefited Ted Cruz
most significantly.
But the other thing that Cruz
has been able to do is, he's put
the three most important
legs of the stool together for
Iowa. He has got evangelicals,
very conservative voters.
Of course, I'm going to
forget the third one.
(LAUGHTER)
AMY WALTER: As I remembered that
-- the evangelicals and people
who are Tea Party supporters.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
AMY WALTER: OK. See, I need to
go to my notes, but I knew there
were three.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
AMY WALTER: So, he's getting
strong support from all three of
those groups. Those are
the groups that determine who
the winner of Iowa will be.
GWEN IFILL: Does he also do well
among people who hate
Washington? He came to
Washington,
but then immediately went to war
against Washington. He calls it
the cartel.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, he came to
Washington, joined the Senate,
and proceeded to help government
-- shut the government down.
I mean, he led the government
shutdown. And then,
interestingly -- and thinking
about
Ted Cruz reminded me of this --
less than a month after the
government shutdown ended,
he went to Iowa, and he gave a
big speech at the Iowa
Republican Party statewide
dinner.
And he has been building the
groundwork in Iowa since before
the government shutdown.
He came to Washington to raise
his profile, and he did with
things like the government
shutdown, and then he goes to
Iowa years before an election,
and has people text in to join
Ted Cruz's army. And he has a
huge infrastructure. He has a
huge ground game, especially in
Iowa,
but also in Southern states,
which will be key after Iowa.
GWEN IFILL: Now, one interesting
detail, last week, before this
latest round of polling
came out, Donald Trump
immediately started trashing the
poll, in advance, possibly
anticipating
on -- I don't know whether he's
doing his own polling -- that
things were not going
as well.
And so what we were all holding
our breath, thinking, what will
Trump say about Cruz,
who has taken pains not to
publicly criticize Donald Trump?
What will Trump say?
And, then very quickly
yesterday, I believe it was on
"FOX News Sunday" -- let's take
a listen -- this is
what he had to say.
DONALD TRUMP: You look at the
way he's dealt with the Senate,
where he goes in there like
a -- frankly, like a little bit
of a maniac. You're never going
to get things done that
way.
Look, I built a phenomenal
business. I'm worth many, many
billions of dollars. I have some
of the greatest assets anywhere
in the world. You can't walk
into the Senate and scream
and call people liars, and not
be able to cajole and get along
with people. He will
never get anything done. And
that's the problem with Ted.
GWEN IFILL: But Donald Trump...
(CROSSTALK)
AMY WALTER: It's kind
of ironic, isn't it?
GWEN IFILL: That is
something interesting.
AMY WALTER: Right.
That is the argument against Ted
Cruz, is that he led the fight
to shut the government
down, that he leads a lot of
fights, but he doesn't have a
lot of victories. And yet,
coming from...
GWEN IFILL: Or friends.
AMY WALTER: Or friends.
And yet coming somebody who is
more than happy to take on the
establishment and tell them
where to stick it, I don't know
that this is the guy that's
going to be able to unite
America either.
GWEN IFILL: Donald Trump has
been an interesting character in
all of this. He has been the
naysayer, and it feels like,
right behind him, Ted Cruz has
been waiting to take that
mantle away.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
The New York Times had a very
interesting piece of audio of
Ted Cruz at a closed door
fund-raiser, saying that he was
going to hug Donald Trump and
Ben Carson until they -- you
know, until gravity took hold of
their campaigns, which he fully
anticipated gravity will take
hold, and then he will be there,
just waiting to scoop up all
that support.
GWEN IFILL: Then, in that same
-- in that same appearance, he
raised questions about
their judgment.
(CROSSTALK)
TAMARA KEITH: Absolutely --
well, because he was behind
closed doors, so he didn't have
to hug quite so tightly.
AMY WALTER: Right.
TAMARA KEITH: Then, of course,
the audio got out. And that is
in part what prompted Donald
Trump to really pick a fight and
start the tweet storm, which Ted
Cruz was like, I'm
not taking the bait.
AMY WALTER: Right.
GWEN IFILL: Tomorrow night,
another -- another -- yet
another in a series of
weeknights spent
watching debates for the three
of us. So, we're going to --
they're all gathering in
Las Vegas. What do
they have to do?
There are a lot of people we
didn't mention in these polls
who are having -- who are
struggling
as well.
AMY WALTER: I don't think that
this debate is going to change
the trajectory of this
race. I think we have seen the
race now basically come down to
three, maybe four people. And
it's Donald Trump and it's Ted
Cruz and it's Marco Rubio.
The one person who I think is
sort of on the bubble right now
is Chris Christie, who is
doing better in New Hampshire.
And I think this environment
that we're in right now,
one where terrorism and security
is the top of the mind for
voters, especially Republican
voters, that plays well
to Christie's strengths.
And I think he will be making
that case a lot tomorrow night,
and making that distinction
between himself, governor in New
Jersey, been around during
terrorism strikes, I know how
to deal with this, these other
guys don't know what they're
doing.
GWEN IFILL: How does Marco Rubio
distinguish himself in that kind
of field?
TAMARA KEITH: I think that there
is more pressure on Marco Rubio
heading into this debate than
there have been in past debates.
He's continually had a strong
debate performance, but now
people are sort of expecting him
to
have a strong debate
performance. And so I think a
lot of people will be watching
him
for that performance. The
question, though, is, he has
these good debate performances,
and then there is this buzz, and
then he maybe moves up a couple
points. He doesn't have
the big surge that Ted Cruz has.
In part, that is because Ted
Cruz is competing on the
anti-establishment, Tea Party,
evangelical
side, and Marco Rubio is
competing on the other side of
the Republican Party, the
establishment
side, which is a very crowded
neighborhood right now.
AMY WALTER: And I think,
ultimately, the winner is going
to be the person, like Ted Cruz,
who is an establishment
candidate, but puts themselves
as anti-establishment.
Ted Cruz is a member of the
United States Senate, has been
part of the Bush administration
in his past, but now
is running against...
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: I'm going to be
watching Ben Carson to see if he
can break out, or anybody else
on the fringes. It's going to be
-- I think it's going to be very
interesting.
AMY WALTER: It will be
interesting, I don't doubt.
GWEN IFILL: Call me.
Amy Walter, Tamara Keith,
thank you both very much.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
now to overseas.
Greek Prime Minister Alexis
Tsipras says that he will not
allow his country to become what
he calls a warehouse for
refugees. And Europe's border
agency is expected to send
agents to
Greece soon in an attempt to
stem the inflow of migrants.
Currently, refugees from only
the conflicts in Syria,
Afghanistan and Iraq are being
permitted
to transit Greece to
countries farther north.
But, as special correspondent
Malcolm Brabant reports, there's
now a roadblock on that trail,
leaving many migrants from other
countries with some tough
choices.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Spanish
lifeguards respond to a call
from volunteers scanning the
horizon
on the cliffs of Lesbos. They're
heading out to the channel to
shepherd the flimsy inflatables
to safety.
After several rough days
prevented crossings from Turkey,
the seas are calm. A flotilla
of overcrowded rubber dinghies
is using the shortest crossing
between the two countries.
The occupants have paid $1,000 a
head for the journey. In the
distorted economics of
the migrant trail, safe arrival
represents value for money,
especially for Syrians like
Hamza Hussein.
HAMZA HUSSEIN, Refugee: You need
to kill Bashar. They are killing
people now. I am too -- I
can't speak now,
please. Thank you.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In the middle
of the picture, you can see a
lifeguard trying to help a
refugee
who has plunged into the sea 50
meters off shore. Mohammed Asti
Mimi is an Iraqi, given
priority by Europe in the
new two-tier migrant trail.
MOHAMMED ASTI MIMI, Refugee:
Yes, I have been swimming. I
have been swimming, because I
thought was funny,
jumped into water.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Having secured
a foothold in Europe, the
Syrians, Afghans and Iraqis
are assured of a relatively
swift passage to the destination
of their choice. But all
other nationalities on this
beach have arrived as the gates
have shut, after Greece's
neighbor,
Macedonia, said it would only
admit people from these three
conflicts.
Farmer Costas Bayotis, who helps
the refugees ashore and salvages
the rafts' components,
disapproves of what he believes
is a discriminatory system.
COSTAS BAYOTIS, Farmer (through
translator): In my opinion, all
the world is suffering.
If they're from Afghanistan,
Iran, Iraq, or Bangladesh, they
are all in the same situation
and must be helped. They have
all got souls. The politicians
are more educated than we
are, so let them try and come up
with a solution for a better
tomorrow for these people, the
best possible.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Dawn at the
next step on the migrant trail,
Piraeus, the country's
key port on the mainland, where,
daily, ferries arrive carrying
thousands of people, aiming
to pass through Greece
as quickly as possible.
The intention of most is to
travel more than 300 miles north
to Macedonia. At the ramps,
scores of travel agents offer
bus tickets to the border.
MAN: Macedonia. Macedonia.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But this is the
ultimate destination for those
who are not Syrian,
Iraqi or Afghan: a fenced-off
former Olympic martial arts
stadium in Athens. All other
nationalities have been
transported here after last
week's closure by Greece of a
camp at
Idomeni on the border
with Macedonia.
Food is in short supply, and
volunteers have struggled to
pacify the newcomers.
MAN: We are here to help you.
MALCOLM BRABANT: "We are here to
help you," called out a
volunteer, urging everyone to
stay calm.
MAN: Help us. Don't push.
MALCOLM BRABANT: It's been a
venue for violence, stabbing,
protests and arrests.
MAN: Conditions are a problem.
There is a sleeping problem.
There is a food problem.
There's a big line. That people
are from Morocco and all these
countries. Yes, the fighting
is a problem.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Outside the
stadium, we met 22-year old
Tassdaq Hussain from Pakistan,
one of those deported from
Idomeni last week, when Greece
acknowledged that Macedonia
wouldn't
compromise over its
wide-ranging ban.
TASSDAQ HUSSAIN, Refugee: But
now I have no idea how to go to
Germany and other countries,
because this border is sealed
for us and Iranians and some
countries. We request to
European
Union and other countries, help
us and please try to open the
border for us.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In common with
other excluded nationalities,
Hussain's options are to seek
asylum in Greece, leave the
country within 30 days, or be
repatriated with a small
financial
grant.
If the government gives you
money to go back, will you go
back?
TASSDAQ HUSSAIN: How much money
do they give? We have spent more
than $4,000, more than
$4,000. They give us 400 euros.
This is too much -- little. This
is the main problem.
Many People have sold all his
fields, his animals, his house,
and like this. They have
no business here. If they have
good -- why come here? If
anybody is comfortable in their
country and their
homeland, why come here?
MALCOLM BRABANT: In the Greek
Parliament, Prime Minister
Alexis Tsipras, once a supporter
of open borders, made it clear
that times have changed, as a
result of Macedonia's ban
and European pressure.
ALEXIS TSIPRAS, Greek Prime
Minister (through translator):
It is true that, if this influx
continues, there is a danger for
the country to be turned into a
warehouse for immigrants.
Well, the country must not and
will not become a warehouse. We
welcome the establishment
of a European Coast Guard. It is
welcome, and the Greek forces
will contribute.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Europe's
reinforcements will arrive at a
time when Turkey is supposed to
be stemming the flow of
migrants, in return for more
than $3 billion and a promise to
speed up the process
of joining the E.U.
But the large number of boats
landing in Lesbos has left some
analysts like Ioannis
Papageorgiou
wondering what Turkey
is doing for its money.
IOANNIS PAPAGEORGIOU, Political
Scientist: I think it's a
disgrace that we have to suffer
-- suffer blackmail from Turkey
as the European Union, but it's
realpolitik. I'm not sure
that they will be able to
fulfill their side of the
bargain. And I'm not also sure
that
the European Union will fulfill
its side of the bargain either.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Many of those
people now arriving in Lesbos
face real frustration,
because it looks as though the
migrant trail has been severed.
Greece's neighbors, Macedonia
and Bulgaria, are effectively
blocked. And the only other
possible available route over
land is Albania. Now, that
nation is mountainous. It's
freezing
cold in winter, and overall is
much more dangerous than any
other Balkan country. But the
traffickers
are considering opening that up
as the next possible option,
even though they're well
aware that people may
possibly die there.
But, having survived the game of
Russian roulette that is the sea
crossing from Turkey, the
refugees have become used to
making calculated risks. The
hope of finding safe haven and
relative prosperity keeps
driving this historic movement
of humanity.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in Lesbos.
GWEN IFILL: Next: Olive oil is a
staple in many of America's
kitchens, and much of it
is produced in Italy. But a
mysterious infection is now
threatening that industry and a
way
of life.
Jeffrey Brown recently traveled
to the olive groves of Southern
Italy.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's the heel of
Italy's boot. The Salento region
may be less known than
the country's more famous
tourist areas. But it boasts
beautiful port towns and idyllic
country roads lined with farms,
vineyards and, most of all, its
renowned olive groves,
some thousands of years old.
GIOVANNI MELCARNE, Oliver Grower
(through translator): For us,
these are not only trees
that produce olive oil, but they
are the Salento landscape
itself. Without these trees, the
Salento will no longer exist.
JEFFREY BROWN: A deadly bacteria
dubbed an olive Ebola has
infected someone million trees
so far, about 10 percent of the
trees in the larger Puglia
province. Some of those olive
groves have been in
families for generations.
That's the case for Giovanni
Melcarne, a grower who believes
500 of his 5,000 trees are now
infected.
But you're fairly certain that
all of this will be lost.
GIOVANNI MELCARNE (through
translator): By what we have
seen so far in the past few
months,
yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: The bacteria is
Xylella fastidiosa, and for
years has been found in a
variety
of plants in Brazil and
California. It is commonly known
as Pierce's disease.
But this strain was discovered
two years ago in Italy by Donato
Boscia, a virologist at
the National Research Council in
Bari, while he was visiting his
father-in-law's farm.
DONATO BOSCIA, Virologist: My
father in law said, "Donato,
please, tomorrow, we can go
in the field. I want to show you
some abnormal -- of the olive
trees." And I went there and
I was shocked.
JEFFREY BROWN: The first signs
of infection are dried-out
leaves, known as leaf scorching.
Eventually, the whole tree
withers. It's thought to have
come to Italy via Costa Rica,
hitching
a ride on a decorative coffee
plant. And it's spread by
insects feeding on tree tissue.
Boscia's team is monitoring that
spread by confirming samples,
studying its carriers,
and testing the live bacteria on
various olive subspecies to see
which might be resistant.
DONATO BOSCIA: We are sure that
the only tool that we have at
the moment available to try
to prevent the appearance of
this disease, of this quick
decline of olive is try to
prevent
the arrival of the bacteria.
JEFFREY BROWN: Italians take
their food very seriously, and
on nearly every table is a
bottle of good olive oil. On
average, Italy trails only Spain
in oil production, responsible
for 15 percent of the world's
virgin olive oil and half of
U.S. imports in an industry
that pulls in more than $2
billion a year to the country.
Its popularity has only grown,
as it's been touted for a range
of health benefits, including
reducing the risk of heart
disease. With so much at stake,
for Italy and the rest of
Europe,
the European Union earlier this
year established a buffer zone
to contain the bacteria to one
province in the south, a
controversial move that left
many growers angry.
GIOVANNI MELCARNE (through
translator): We are very
dissatisfied. The E.U. is only
interested
in blocking the advance of the
bacteria to the north. This
area, the area of the breakout,
has been left to its fate.
JEFFREY BROWN: The measure
required the cutting down of
infected trees and even
seemingly
healthy ones nearby.
GIUSEPPE SILLETTI, Regional
Director, Italian Forestry
Service (through translator): My
job would be a lot easier if not
for all the misunderstanding.
Every group has different
thoughts on how to
tackle the problem.
JEFFREY BROWN: Giuseppe
Silletti, regional director of
Italy's Forestry Service, is the
man tasked with implementing
that plan for the Italian
government and E.U. But he says
he's not getting the help
he needs from farmers.
GIUSEPPE SILLETTI (through
translator): I have news that
the owners do everything they
can to hide the disease. If they
have a tree with symptoms, they
prune the plants, so they
look healthy. This is very bad,
because it prevents us from
being able to identify how
much the disease is spreading.
JEFFREY BROWN: In fact, many
farmers and activists are
skeptical of both the government
response
and the scientific
research on the bacteria.
Virologist Donato Boscia was
even accused of introducing the
bacteria into Italy.
DONATO BOSCIA: Saying to these
people, sorry, but we are, how
to say, a cancer, like that,
so something that you can not
cure, that your time is limited,
there are -- no therapy,
is something that is
difficult to accept.
JEFFREY BROWN: Some, like olive
grower Roberto Polo, believe a
variety of factors, including
pesticides, are to blame.
ROBERTO POLO, Olive Grower
(through translator): I believe
that it is not only the bacteria
to blame for the rapid drying
out of the olive trees, but a
combination of causes which have
compromised the immune system of
the trees. In practice, we have
seen a reduction in the
ability of the trees to defend
themselves from external attacks
of any kind.
ROBERTO ZILETTI, Business Owner:
It's a matter of time. It will
come.
JEFFREY BROWN: Polo's neighbor,
Roberto Ziletti, owns the Antica
Masseria del Fano, an old
farm that's been converted into
a bed and breakfast with its own
prize-winning olive
oil production.
ROBERTO ZILETTI: Historically,
there are people that believe
that these things always happen,
and it will -- as it arrives,
it will go away, alone.
JEFFREY BROWN: Just naturally.
ROBERTO ZILETTI: Naturally.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
ROBERTO ZILETTI: I don't know if
this is true. Probably, it's
true, but the matter is that
these days the problem
is very, very big.
JEFFREY BROWN: The government
has been attempting to enlist
more cooperation from farmers by
paying them to cut down their
own infected trees. That plan
was dealt a blow last month
when a regional Italian court
temporarily halted the removal
of outwardly healthy trees
in the infected zone, until the
bacteria could be proven as the
cause of the disease.
Researcher Boscia
responds this way:
DONATO BOSCIA: We do not have
the proof that the bacterium
alone can cause the disease,
but the disease appear only when
the bacterium arrive there.
JEFFREY BROWN: Also unknown is
the incubation period, meaning
many more trees could be
infected
and not yet symptomatic.
GIOVANNI MELCARNE (through
translator): In Italy, we have
100 different opinions. But
what is certain is that these
plants are dying, that these
plants are drying, and we don't
know what the future will be.
And we don't even know that
there's a solution to this
situation.
JEFFREY BROWN: And there are
already signs the bacteria has
spread farther north, even
to France and Corsica, though
not yet infecting olive trees,
suggesting this problem isn't
going anywhere anytime soon.
From the boot of Southern Italy,
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we return to
another one of our "NewsHour"
essays.
Tonight, Julie Lythcott-Haims, a
former Stanford University
undergraduate dean and author of
the book "How to Raise an
Adult," shares ideas on her
belief that the job of parents
is to
put themselves out of work.
Here's her perspective on why it
is important to get out of the
overparenting trap.
JULIE LYTHCOTT-HAIMS, Author,
"How to Raise an Adult": We
parents seem to have forgotten
a simple, unassailable
fact: We're mammals.
Sure, we may be mammals with
clothing and cell phones,
but,like our counterparts in
the wild, our job as parents is
to put ourselves out of a job,
and raise our kids to be
independent
adults who can raise their own
offspring one day. If you think
about it, it's how we evolved
to this point as humans.
But, these days, too many of us
feel our child simply will not
be successful in life unless
we constantly protect and
prevent at every turn, hover
over every happening,
micromanage
every moment, take care
of every little thing.
Yes, we can help our kids get a
short-term win when we overhelp,
such as the better grades
that come when we remind them to
put their homework in their
backpack, or bring it to
school when they have forgotten
it, or outright do some of the
work for them.
And our overinvolvement
certainly makes life more
pleasant for our kids. Often, we
let
them off the hook for doing the
mundane tasks of life, such as
chores, and instead we
prioritize
their homework and enrichment
activities over all else.
But this leads to young adults
who can't do the basic tasks
associated with living life
on their own. A fellow college
dean on another campus told me
of a kid whose parents installed
a webcam in the dorm room in
order to wake their kid up each
morning in college. A student
told me of a friend whose
parents always filled her car
with gas, so she never learned.
And then while driving one day
in her 20s, she noticed her tank
was low on fuel, and
she ended up filling the car
with diesel, instead of
unleaded. And some parents are
so accustomed to arguing over
grades in high school and
college, that they expect to do
the same in the workplace.
A manager at a prestigious
company told me of hearing from
parents of an employee who
were dissatisfied with their --
quote, unquote -- "child"'s
performance review.
Do parents do that?
Yes, parents do.
Look, we love our kids with a
driving force we can barely
comprehend. I think of it as
an aching, fierce, terror joy.
Of course, we want the very best
for them. And we love
to be needed, and we feel a
great deal of satisfaction when
we ensure that their needs
are met.
But overhelping can come at a
significant long-term cost to
our kids. It deprives them
of the chance to build
self-efficacy, a critical aspect
of psychological wellness that
comes
from seeing that one's own
actions lead to outcomes, one's
own actions, not one's parents'
actions on one's behalf.
We end up raising kids who fail
to launch, who don't have their
the wherewithal to do
for themselves, and who still
need us to act as the adult in
their lives.
No matter how impressive our
kid's childhood GPA or resume
may be, we have simply not done
right by our kids, our society,
our species, if they have
reached the age of chronological
adulthood, but don't have the
skills, habits, mind-sets, and
confidence to do for themselves.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online: a film about Tyrone
West, who died in Baltimore
police
custody in the summer of 2013.
The officers were cleared of all
wrongdoing, but the case
is receiving renewed attention
in light of the death of Freddie
Gray. You can find that
video on our Facebook page and
our home page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's
the "NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, we will look at the
future of energy, on the heels
of the Paris climate
change agreement. Miles O'Brien
offers a reality check on the
limits of renewable energy and
what it will take to create a
long-lasting alternative to
fossil fuels.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
here at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.